Using the Internet for Publicity: The Experiences of a Community Group

In March of 1993, AIUSA Group 19 in Palo Alto, California made two
separate but related decisions: (1) to make its monthly newsletters
available by electronic mail, and (2) to publicize its activities on
the Internet by advertising on San Francisco Bay Area newsgroups and
bulletin boards.  Terrie Rodello, then the group coordinator and
newsletter editor, computerized the composition of the newsletters,
retyping the text when necessary.  To facilitate the computerization
of the newsletter production, a group member (Samson Tu) opened an
account on Peacenet to gain access to the on-line information
published by AIUSA. Samson started posting announcements of Group 19
meetings and activities on local newsgroups such as 'ba.announce',
'ba.general', and 'ba.politics'. The postings offered interested
individuals the opportunity to receive Group 19 newsletters by joining
an electronic mailing list that Samson maintains.  Later that year, the
postings on the newsgroups expanded to cover all San Francisco Bay
area Amnesty events. A calendar of events was posted first on a
weekly, and later on a biweekly schedule.  In addition to the
newsletters, those on the electronic mailing list received a long
message describing Amnesty International and Group 19.  Recently, we
added a membership questionnaire that we asked newcomers to fill out
and return to us.

We cannot say that the attendance at our activities increased as a
directly result of the announcements posted on the newsgroups.  Like
putting flyers on public places, such announcements are at best a
low-yield publicity technique. However, we have evidences indicating
that these postings were noticed.  Colleagues of group members
commented on the announcements. We also receive direct feedback from
people requesting our newsletter and further information about
Amnesty.  Each month four or five new people joined our electronic
newsletter mailing list until size of the mailing list stabilized
around 55 members.  Thus, announcing activities on electronic forums
makes Amnesty visible in the virtual electronic community.  Posting on
electronic forum has information value, even if it does not directly
increase attendance at Amnesty events.

Furthermore, we found that after having received the newsletter for a
while, some people did come to our meetings.  A rough guess is that
one quarter to one third of newcomers to our meetings initially
received our newsletters through email.  One current Action File
Coordinator came to Group 19 as a member of our electronic mailing
list.

We also received offers to further distribute the Amnesty
announcements. Right now, three friends help to redistribute these
announcements of Group 19 and Bay Area Amnesty events to networks and
bulletin boards that we cannot access directly.

We found the on-line version of Monthly Mailing (MM) on Peacenet to be
a very valuable resource.  It made the production of our newsletter
much easier.  There was much gnashing of teeth when Diana Quick went
on leave and the posting of MM was interrupted. We tried to scan parts
of the MM and apply OCR to the scanned text, but the quality of MM
printing was not good enough for the technique to be effective.  

The major lesson from our experiences is that for the purpose of 
attracting new members, posting announcements on local Internet forums
is not particulary effective (although such announcements make Amnesty
visible in the local electronic community).  However, a tool like
electronic newsletters allow a local group to cultivate interested 
individuals who later may become members.

Our next project on the electronic frontier is to build an electronic
mailing list that link Amnesty members in the San Francisco Bay area.  
We are just getting started, but we already have members from 10 of 
the 16 Amnesty groups in the Bay area on our list.  In a future 
message we will describe our efforts in this project.  If you are 
interested in either receiving Group 19 newsletter electronically or participating in the Bay area mailing list, contact 'tu@camis.stanford.edu'.

Samson Tu
AIUSA Group 19, Palo Alto, California
