** Topic: The one and only MAT report **
** Written  8:31 PM  Mar  1, 1995 by aiaction in cdp:aiusa.policy **
INTERNAL (for AI members only)
 
			*********************************
			*  No electronic redistribution *
                        *  without permission from      *
			*   Jim Sayer, AIUSA Board      *
			*     <jsayer@igc.apc.org       *
			*********************************
 
Summary (The Short Story)
 
MAT's Charge
 
	To develop a practical, results-oriented plan to improve the
membership support and development program of Amnesty International USA. 
 
Why Change? 
 
	Improve our human rights protection capabilities through
increased membership activism. 
 
	Fight the rising tide of human rights violations around the
world -- and declining health of AIUSA's grassroots (number of groups,
members per group, output per group, activist burn-out) at home. 
 
	Tie in with AIUSA's new strategic planning effort, which calls
for increased volunteer and membership activism as a central source of
power. 
 
	Promote volunteer activism:  Amnesty's most powerful and
distinctive tool.  Human rights victims can't afford to see it
diminished now. 
 
What Change?
 
	Systemic changes:  (1) Re-focus AIUSA's regional operations on
field organizing.  Consolidate key field support functions at national
level.  Trim back regional office responsibilities.  Evolve toward
putting more field organizers and regional offices in to underserved
parts of the U.S.  (2) Gradually consolidate youth and local group
support operations to provide more efficient and equitable support for
all activists.  Involve activists up-front in work planning, using
regional planning groups and clusters. 
 
	Specific changes:  Improvements in activist recruitment,
placement, training, recognition and graduation (flowing people through
new responsibilities).  Provide better support, communications,
materials for groups and ACs/SACs and other volunteers leader s.  Ensure
accountability for results at all levels of local, regional and national
operations. 
 
How Do We Change?
 
	Phase I (1995-96):  Operate within existing resources.  Focus on
catalyzing creation of National Field Operation Unit and improving basic
group support.

	Phase II (1996-98):  Establish full-fledged National Field
Operation Unit, including National Support Staff.  Focus regional
offices on field work.  Provide first-rate materials and support to
groups.  Set standards for groups and coordinators.  Undertak e
significant fundraising campaign to support activist expansion. 
 
	Phase III (1998-2000):  Flesh out field operations through new
field offices, area meetings, better communications.  Consolidate youth
and local group coordination programs. 
 
What Will Change Look Like?
 
If AIUSA moves in the direction proposed by MAT, the results could be robust:
 
	More volunteer activists recruited, placed and retained;

	Activists who are better prepared and coordinated;

	Activists and groups connected -- not isolated -- by staff,
volunteer leaders, first-rate materials, and advanced
telecommunications;

	Groups and activists planning ahead, guided by clear national
priorities -- and their own involvement in the planning process;

	Local and youth groups receiving timely, substantial and regular
support;

	Activists who more closely reflect the changing demographic and
cultural mix of the United States;

	Groups and activists spread across all parts of the U.S., rural
and urban, coastal and inland;

	Activists who stick with Amnesty International because it gives
them enjoyment, satisfaction, and opportunities for personal growth; and

	most important of all, a much more powerful activist base to
effectively combat human rights violations at home and around the world. 
 
It's an attractive picture, full of action, hope and opportunity.  We
hope you'll join us and help shape MAT's draft proposals into a workable
plan for AIUSA's activist future. MAT's Charge
 
The Membership Action Team was chartered by the Board of Directors of
Amnesty International USA to create a practical, results-oriented plan
(with a specific timeline and clear definition of resource requirements)
to improve the support and development of AIUSA's volunteer membership,
especially its local groups, student groups, and action networks. 
 
We follow in a long line of internal efforts to determine what ails
AIUSA's activist structure and how to deal with it.  The groups behind
those efforts _ from the Membership Development Task Force to the Group
Health Group to the Small Communities Task F orce _ put forward a wealth
of excellent ideas.  But unfortunately, practically nothing has been
done to implement them.  Whether through inertia or inaction, little has
been accomplished to fundamentally improve the development of AIUSA's
activist base ( a problem that has been compounded over the last five
years by major cuts in staff and resource support for volunteer
activists). 
 
So what makes MAT different?  Two things.  First, we are doing our work
in the midst of an exciting time at Amnesty.  Sweet breezes of change
are flowing throughout the organization -- and they're matched by an
apparently powerful political will for chang e.  There's a clear
recognition that the world is dramatically changing -- in terms of human
rights abuses, political and economic relationships, and so much more
--and that Amnesty needs to change to be effective. 
 
This recognition is reflected institutionally in the sweeping strategic
reviews at the international and national levels.  (We're especially
pleased to be basing our proposals in part on the outstanding work done
by AIUSA's Strategic Planning Team.) But it can also be found in AIUSA
members' comments across the country, comments that we have heard
directly or through preceding task forces.  We believe this strong
desire for change -- at all levels of the organization -- will enable us
to make change, not simply espouse it.
 
MAT's second difference -- and advantage -- is that our objective is
action.  We recognize that the strands of a solution to AIUSA's activist
ailments are threaded throughout the many reform reports already issued,
as well as the Strategic Planning Team's findings and recommendations. 
Our job has been to identify these strands, weave them together and
create a new activist tapestry for a changing world and a changing human
rights movement. 
 
We've done our best to meet the mandate of the Board and develop a
useful reform program.  We hope you'll do your best to review and make
constructive changes to MAT's recommendations -- and then, most
importantly, make them happen. 

Why Change? 
 
There are many reasons for AIUSA to change its volunteer activist
structure.  The most important is that, without serious reform, AIUSA
won't be able to effectively fight the human rights battles of the 21st
century. 
 
As the Strategic Planning Team (SPiT) has found, AIUSA (and AI
generally) needs to develop a well-coordinated, pro-active, diverse and
highly skilled activist force that can engage in rapid tactical
responses or strategic campaigns -- utilizing many tools -- against human 
rights violators and their supporters.
 
But right now, we don't have that kind of activist force.  Reports from
the Group Health Group, Membership Development Task Force, Communitas,
the Small Communities Task Force, and the most recent Youth Program
Review, as well as comments drawn from AIUSA leaders in interviews with
SPiT, point to basic problems afflicting AIUSA's local and youth group
structures _ the core of our activist corps.  They paint a picture of a
volunteer activist support structure that: 
 
	lacks clear action priorities nationally or at the group level;
 
	overburdens groups with too many actions and issues and too much paper;
 
	lacks tight coordination and communication;
 
	isolates groups through lack of contact or meeting opportunities;
 
	offers groups minimal guidance on how to organize or carry out
their work; 
 
	recruits and places new members for activist work sporadically
and unsystematically; 
 
	falls short of reflecting the remarkable diversity of the U.S.
population; 
 
	provides insufficient and inconsistent materials and trainings;
 
	invests unequally in different regions and different sectors
(especially between youth and local groups); 
 
	fails to "flow and grow" activists through the organization; and
 
	neglects to create a regular climate of appreciation and
celebration of group or individual accomplishments. 
 
While these problems have become more apparent, our traditional activist
base has eroded.  Network staff and volunteers, for example, feel
overwhelmed, starved for resources and unclear on how they fit into
AIUSA's overall structure.  Even when networks p ull off remarkable
results _ as AI Members for Lesbian and Gay Concerns did with their
"Breaking the Silence" campaign _ they end up finding themselves with
reduced staff support and no clear pathway to make their issues an
integral part of AIUSA's work. 
 
Group Health Indicators
 
Just as troubling, "health indicators" for youth and local groups _
especially the latter _ reveal that AIUSA is watching its grassroots
disappear at a steady clip. 
 
Recent surveys show that local group numbers have dropped to 349 from
more than 400 in the late 1980s.  And recent phone surveys by several
regions _ especially in the West _ have revealed that, of those 349
groups, a considerable number exist only on pap er.  (Beyond numbers,
it's important to note that AIUSA groups remain highly concentrated on
the coasts, in urban areas, and remain strongly homogeneous, despite
efforts to diversify the racial, political and other characteristics of
our activist base.)
 
Within local groups, the trend is also troubling.  The number of members
per group has declined, from an average of 16-18 members per group in
the late 1980s to 12 in 1993.  Even that figure may be high, since it's
drawn from AIUSA's annual survey of loca l groups.  Only 1/3 of all
local groups typically respond and many of the respondents were among
the section's strongest groups _ which means that activist numbers may
be even lower.  Backing up that notion, the Group Health Group's report,
along with rec ent AC and regional office phone surveys, have indicated
that many groups may be getting by with only 4-6 active members. 
 
The situation is apparently not so problematic for youth groups,
although they have also experienced a net decrease since the early
1990s.  According to AIUSA reports, youth groups peaked in 1990 at over
2,000, then dropped to 1,500 and have since risen b ack up to 1,800.  As
for members in groups, approximately half of the groups have 1-10
members while most of the remaining groups range between 11 and 20
members.  The most recent average number per group (reported in 1991-92)
is 11. 
 
Again, however, these numbers are based on very uncertain data.  The
1993-94 youth group survey drew responses from only 10 percent of all
groups _ an indicator of how little AIUSA knows about its activist base. 
 
The Bottom Line
 
Does this short survey mean AIUSA'a activist structure is in tatters? 
The short answer is no.  AIUSA still has many vibrant and visible
groups.  Youth groups have proven resilient despite lessening public
interest in human rights.  Action networks like the Human Rights
Educators have accomplished extraordinary feats, such as the creation of
slick videos and magazines for students on human rights issues _ all
donated! 
 
Clearly, the problem isn't that human rights work isn't being done. 
It's that this work is being done in spite of an organization that isn't
structured to maximize the capacity, skills, and enjoyment of its
volunteer activists. 
 
AIUSA's volunteers already recognize this.  They're pushing the
envelope, by resolution or example, for volunteer awards, field
organizers, better materials _ all things that have been called for in
the past, but are only beginning to happen now. 
 
MAT's recommendations build on this momentum for change, cream the best
ideas from the countless reports before ours, frame them to support the
direction proposed by SPiT, and orchestrate them so that they can be
implemented beginning with the 1995-1996 b udget and planning cycle _
not in the far-distant-future. 

What Change? 
 
We drew our directions for change not only from members' comments and
previous reports, but from the Strategic Planning Team's goals which
relate to volunteer support and development, and deal with the problems
described above.  Specifically, SPiT has cal led for: 
 
	Building member presence around the country, devoting staff
resources to it, and diversifying our volunteers; 
 
	Creating a physical presence with an office in more places;
 
	Expanding AIUSA's membership empowerment over time, in targeted
metropolitan areas or rural states; 
 
	Recognizing the role of staff as organizers (not overburdened
"do-ers" or passive "servicers"); 
 
	Developing flexible and creative ways for people to contribute
their activism, through new structures in addition to groups and
networks; 
 
	Adopting a "results orientation," setting activity goals,
reviewing and evaluating activity, sharing innovations, and celebrating
successes; and
 
	Developing a "life path" of activity, from student through
retirement, including models of support, training, and mentoring and
linkages between youth and adults. 
 
SPiT members have also noted _ and we concur _ that a sensible path to
change is to build organically out of what we have, rather than tearing
apart our entire organization.  There are so many outstanding resources
across the realm at AIUSA _ dedicated vo lunteers, skilled staff, a
well-understood mandate, the brilliant tactic of personalizing human
rights issues _ that we have made every effort to capitalize on them,
rather than create a new volunteer support and development structure out
of whole cloth. 
 
With that in mind, we recommend two approaches _ systemic and specific _
to achieve SPiT's goals.  The systemic approach overhauls the basic
structure of AIUSA's membership program.  The specific approach deals
more surgically with specific aspects of AIU SA's activist operations. 
 
MAT makes the following recommendations with one caveat.  As with SPiT,
we don't expect major changes to occur overnight.  We are looking for
these changes to be implemented over a five year period (just in time
for the new millennium!), a timeline we add ress in the third section of
this report. Systemic Change
 
In our exploration of AIUSA's volunteer system over the last 20 years,
one structural development stood out very clearly:  the transformation
of our regional operations from "field" operations _ aggressively
developing new activist and group capacity _ in to fixed stations:
mini-national offices, in which a limited number of small, lightly
staffed regional offices are expected to perform a huge number of tasks
for broad geographic areas, including media, training, and membership
support. 
 
When the emphasis was on field organizing from the mid-1970s to 80s,
AIUSA's local group and volunteer capacity grew steadily.  When it
shifted to fixed regional offices, group capacity stabilized and
eventually shrank _ even in the wake of the "Human Rig hts Now!"
concerts which caused AIUSA's membership to more than triple. 
 
It is true that youth groups boomed upward from the mid-1980s to early
1990s, which might seem like an offset to local groups' declining
numbers.  But as many volunteers and staff acknowledge, much of this
remarkable growth has occurred without substanti al regional support. 
Moreover, one reason for the recent net decline of youth groups _ cited
by students and staff _ is the low level of regional field support. 
 
The sad fact is that regional offices have been overwhelmed with a
mountain of work, often duplicating work being done at other regional
offices (for example, each creating their own new group packets) or
doing work that could be more sensibly consolidate d at the national
level (e.g., training, material development, media, or conference
organizing).  Their workload has made it extremely difficult for
regional staff and volunteers to act as catalysts for new activist
development and support. 
 
Additionally, combining this workload with the very limited number of
regional offices _ and the huge areas they must cover, especially in the
West and South _ has made it nearly impossible for isolated Amnesty
outposts to effectively engage all parts of their territories. 
 
MAT believes that, for the purpose of stimulating new volunteer
activism, it's time to go back to the future.  At the regional level,
it's time to trim back the functions of the regional offices and
re-focus their attention on volunteer development and su pport.  At the
national level, we propose the more efficient consolidation of a number
of tasks that are now performed at the regional level, as well as
creation of a field operations unit, to give this element of AIUSA's
work the priority status and focu s it has not had for nearly a decade. 
 
The systemic reforms we propose include at the national level:
 
	Establishing a field operation unit within the Department of
Membership Mobilization, which would encompass and coordinate the
regional offices; 
 
	Re-organizing national staff and regional resources to create
national field support staff, especially for the purposes of national
training, resource development and delivery (including guidebooks,
materials, and videos), conference organizing (especial ly the AGM but
also consultation for regional conferences), and membership
communications; 
 
	Consolidating over time the support and development operations
for youth and local groups, recognizing their converging capabilities
and the need to make equitable and efficient use of AIUSA resources; 
 
	Evaluating (per the recommendation of SPiT) over the next 4-6
months AIUSA's network arrangement:  the duties carried out by networks,
as well as how they're initiated, funded, operated, and staffed; 
 
and at the regional level:
 
	Reducing regional staff workload by consolidating some
responsibilities in existing national units (e.g. media and
administration) and others (described above) in the new national field
support staff; 
 
	Establishing in each regional office a field organizer, who will
spend as much as 75 percent of her/his time supporting and developing
activist capacity at the grassroots level; 
 
	Enhancing membership involvement in volunteer support and
development by formalizing Regional Planning Groups (RPGs _ hey, we had
to throw in one new acronym) to help develop and monitor regional
workplans and advise on field operations and exploring the
 more systematic use of clusters;
 
	Evaluating the creation of new regional offices (e.g. in the
Northwest and South-central U.S.) to spread AIUSA's physical presence
and more evenly distribute field responsibilities among regional
offices. 
 
	(We also advise that fresh thinking should be applied to the
make-up of these new regional offices.  With a renewed emphasis on field
organizing, new regional offices may not need to be substantial, fixed
operations.  Classic organizers can often set up shop in another
organization's office, with minimal overhead costs.)
 
This new systemic approach (with one possible system graphically
presented on the next page) meets many of the concerns and needs cited
by SPiT and past volunteer analyses.  It utilizes yet adapts our current
regional system.  It puts the premium back on grassroots vigor.  It
generates a departmental focus and responsibility for volunteer
activism.  It injects consistency and efficiency into critical tasks
like training and communication.  It begins to equalize the status _ and
resources devoted to _ yout h and local groups.  It offers the chance to
harmonize and simplify resource materials.  It reaches out to
underserved parts of the U.S.  And _ hallelujah! _ it starts to ease the
burdens on stressed-out staff and burned-out volunteers. 
 
Specific Change
 
Systemic changes are only part of the solution.  As the Membership
Development Task Force (MDTF) observed, a number of specific changes are
also needed to improve volunteer recruitment and celebration, the groups
in which they participate, the way groups are supported, and how
volunteers "graduate" and flow through AIUSA's myriad opportunities for
personal development. 
 
Nearly all of the following proposed changes are drawn from volunteer
and staff suggestions, many of them in reports from MDTF, the Small
Community Task Force, and the Group Health Group.  They've been selected
or conceived to complement the systemic chan ges we put forward, helping
to deal with some of the critical problems cited above, among them lack
of guidance for groups and individual volunteers, setting priorities,
and improving communication.  We've ordered them along the lines of the
"life cycle"  of a volunteer from the time they join to the time they
"graduate" to a new challenge within AIUSA. 
 
Recruitment
 
AIUSA needs to explore more ways to bring in volunteer recruits and then
ensure that they're directed toward opportunities as rapidly and
courteously as possible.  We and other membership reform groups have
heard from many members that for them and others , it can be a real
struggle for a person to find a niche as an AIUSA activist. 
 
1. Recruitment:  Make a key component of future marketing, media, and
promotion campaigns the promotion of AIUSA volunteers and their
effectiveness (personalize a la United Way campaigns). 
 
2. Recruitment:  Utilize professional Volunteer Centers on a systematic
basis to attract more activist-caliber volunteers. 
 
3. Recruitment:  Add volunteer option for 800# callers (all AIUSA does
now is ask people to fork over membership dollars). 
 
4. Recruitment:  Put Amnesty 800# in the phone books for state capitols
and major metropolitan areas, where AIUSA has no office presence, and
track phone calls by market and recruitment responsiveness. 
 
5. Recruitment:  Set standard for turnaround on volunteer inquiry
response of five working days maximum. 
 
6. Recruitment materials:  Develop a quarterly sheet of specialized
volunteer opportunities ("Help Wanted") across AIUSA for distribution to
members and volunteer centers. 
 
7. Recruitment materials:  Produce a snappier volunteer brochure for
membership enclosure, featuring accomplishments and good graphics; 
create small, colorful, and graphically enticing inserts _ for AI
publications, direct mail pieces, appeals _ that mem bers can become
activists (by calling AIUSA's 800#!);  develop profiles for all AIUSA
volunteer types for the purposes of volunteer recognition (see below)
and to serve as role models to attract _ and define attractive
opportunities for_ new recruits. 
 
8. Recruitment materials:  Develop a short recruitment video for members
and volunteers. 
 
9. Recruitment:  Explore sending a quarterly stream of new members'
names and addresses to local groups (as done for Sierra Club chapters
and groups). 
 
10. Recruitment:  Include in all AI and AIUSA publications a bold
reminder (up front) that individuals can become activists (with an
800#). 
 
Youth and Local Groups
 
We have several goals in mind here.  One is to set minimum standards for
groups to meet _ to give them a sense of responsibility and attainment,
and to ensure that AIUSA is getting a return on its substantial
per-group investment.  Another is to continue the convergence of
responsibilities (and opportunities) for youth and local groups _ which
also means we can begin to seek international (and well-deserved)
accreditation for AIUSA's youth groups.  A final important goal is to
offer groups a sense of stru cture and how they can relate their
resources to work they can accomplish without a sense of guilt. 
 
11. Local groups:  Set minimum standards for each group (at least one
action file, ~$300 minimum assessment [with waiver available],
maintaining public presence, returning annual group survey). 
 
12. Youth groups:  Continue and complete widespread allocation of action
files, bringing student groups' human rights work opportunities into
line with local groups'.  (We also strongly urge the continued joint
assignment of action files to student and lo cal groups, to increase
local synergies and promote more powerful case activity.)
 
13. Youth groups:  Set minimum standards for each group (participation
in at least one action file when available, minimum financial assessment
[keep current arrangements for high school and college groups],
maintaining presence on campus and in public, r eturning annual group
survey). 
 
14. Local and youth groups:  Develop basic modular system to help local
and youth groups determine the type and amount of work they can
undertake with their current resources.  Such a modular system will also
enable them to grow (or shrink) as their resou rces change _ and will
give them role models to emulate and consult.  Following these models
would be strictly voluntary, but strongly encouraged. 
 
15. Local and youth groups:  Standardized start-up materials for new
groups (perhaps based on the good new materials generated by the
Southern Regional Office).  Maintain basic national start-up materials 
for student groups, but standardize regional packets.
 
16. Local and student groups:  Ensure at least one annual visit (to
listen, advise, observe) to each group by a staff member, AC or SAC. 
 
Support:  ACs/SACs/Clusters
 
17. ACs and SACs:  Establish a standard ratio of groups per AC or SAC of
no more than 8 groups.  Make it a top priority of field organizers to
recruit ACs and SACs to meet this ratio numerically and in a
geographically rational way. 
 
18. ACs and SACs:  Establish standard that all ACs and SACs should
contact the groups for which they're responsible at least once a month
and that their groups receive at least one personal visit from either
themselves or field support staff once a year. 
 
19. ACs and SACs:  Develop a transition plan to bring together and
equalize the AC and SAC support structures, to enable more effective and
equitable servicing of youth and local groups.  Ensure that the plan
opens leadership opportunities to all AIUSA ac tivists, irrespective of
age or background. 
 
20. ACs and SACs:  Set national standards for training of both ACs and
SACs and ensure that the standards and manual are updated on a biennial
basis. 
 
21. ACs and SACs:  Set a standard amount of reimbursement for ACs and
SACs, based on number of groups serviced.  Create a supplemental budget
for special coordinator districts with substantial travel costs. 22. ACs
and SACs:  Support recruitment efforts to continue diversification of AC
and SAC personnel. 
 
23. Clusters:  Explore the more systematic development of clusters _
like those in Philadelphia, Puget Sound and the Bay Area _ to facilitate
better coordination among AIUSA activists and groups in metropolitan
areas, and complement the work of field orga nizers and Regional
Planning Groups. 
 
Support:  Resource Development and Delivery
 
24. Resource Delivery:  Return of AIUSA activist phone calls within 24
hours and delivery of basic AIUSA materials to activists within two
business days. 
 
25. Materials:  Routinely update Local Group Handbook and update Student
Resource Manual. 
 
26. Materials:  Routinely update video for student groups and create a
new video for establishing new groups. 
 
27. Materials:  Routinely update training manual for local groups. 
 
Support:  Communication
 
MAT believes it is important to focus AIUSA's activist literature, so
that it is:  easy to follow, sets clear priorities, reaches out to its
intended audience, and contains a strong personal dimension.  We also
urge AIUSA to follow the youth program's ex ample, and bring our "look"
into the 21st century with crisp, clear graphics and photos.  Finally,
we hope AIUSA will never miss a chance to offer dues-paying members
crystal clear opportunities to join the organization's activist wing _
and activists cry stal clear opportunities to try (and enjoy) new
volunteer roles. 
 
28. Communication:  Improve the graphic design, legibility, and
consistency of the Monthly Mailing and Amnesty Action. 
 
29. Communication:  Slim down the overall content of the Monthly Mailing
_ making more materials optional and available on request and reorganize
it to:  follow a workplan cycle over the year (e.g. January _ here's
what's coming over the next year; Decemb er _ here's what we
accomplished); emphasize one or two features up front that would be of
interest to all groups (e.g. _ the latest prisoner saving techniques; 10
easy fundraisers); use the front pages wisely for graphic and grab-you
impact _ not just ad dresses; feature personal profiles and pictures of
different kinds of AIUSA activists (volunteers and staff) for
inspiration and role definition; emphasize the needs of basic groups
earlier in the mailing and more sophisticated groups later. 
 
30. Communication:  Make more prominent pitches in Amnesty Action for
activist involvement.  Use sidebars featuring related volunteer
activities (with pictures and graphics please!) to accompany articles on
country actions. 
 
31. Communication:  Establish an e-mail "fund" to support ACs', SACs',
and other volunteers' communication. 
 
32. Communication:  Supplement regional meetings with smaller, simpler
annual area meetings for groups in remote sections of the U.S. 
 
33. Communication:  In all AIUSA publications _ even newsletters by
groups, ACs, SACs, and other volunteer leaders _ ensure the language
remains non-partisan, independent, and to the (human rights) point to
avoid offending people for personal reasons (e.g . for their political
beliefs or cultural heritage). 
 
Recognition and Appreciation
 
This is a difficult section, because AIUSA's tendency has been to see
recognition of one activist's accomplishments as a corollary diminution
of other activists' work.  It's understandable _ but it's also a major
hindrance in the way AIUSA motivates peopl e and puts a human face on
our activist base.  We propose the following _ in part based on
suggestions by Virginia Hatch and Ceil Glackin _ as techniques not only
to recognize service, but also to provide role models and inspiration
for other aspiring act ivists. 
 
34. Recognition:  Regular recognition and profiles of individuals and
groups in all AIUSA membership publications (see Communications #29
above). 
 
35. Recognition:  Lapel pins for service at 5-10-20 year intervals _
that people can wear with pride at AI gatherings, and that new members
can spot as a way of finding mentors and guides through the
organization. 
 
36. Recognition:  Certificates, decals, or patches for key
accomplishments (e.g., starting a new group, completing an important
training).  These should be significant accomplishments, so that they
aren't perceived as "cheap honors." 
 
Graduation/Transition/Recession
 
37. Graduation:  Include an annual pitch (bright, colorful, graphic) for
different volunteer opportunities in Freedom Writers' mailing and Urgent
Action mailing.  Code response form to determine effectiveness of
bringing in new activists through mailings. 

38. Graduation:  Send end-of-the-(school) year mailing to college groups
with: offer for free membership for one year in AIUSA (an alumni
program); colorful insert listing all local groups in U.S.; and
inexpensive brochure with life stories of students wh o made the jump to
local group or other AIUSA activist work (with pictures of student,
preferably then and now). 
 
39. Graduation:  Send end-of-the-year mailing to high school groups with
colorful insert listing all college groups in the U.S. and a short
primer of inspirational examples of how recent high school graduates
have formed college groups. 
 
40. Graduation:  Provide trainings/workshops at Student Activism Days on
how to cross the great divide to adult activism (how to juggle career,
new social activities with a continued allegiance to AI). 

How Do We Change? 
 
The key problems with past membership support and development efforts
have been the lack of a clear timeline (to implement proposed changes),
a realistic definition of required resources, and a clear allocation of
responsibilities for effecting change. 
 
We propose here a basic implementation plan for the systemic and
specific changes proposed above.  The plan is broken down over the next
five years into three phases: Phase I (1995-96), Phase II (1996-98), and
Phase III (1998-2000). 
 
We are under no delusion that this is a perfect plan.  It will require
modifications and constant re-evaluation over the next five years.  But
we think it's the basis for realistic and meaningful reform of our
membership development and support system.  W e also believe it provides
an inviting vehicle for donors of all types to invest in the future
growth of the human rights movement. 
 
We urge you to pay special attention to this section, and hope you will
help us refine what is the most crucial part of our report:  making the
difficult transition from our current activist structure to a more
dynamic and broad-based membership force for human rights.
 
 
Phase I:  1995-1996
 
Our presumption is that AIUSA will be living within the same budget in
FY 1996 as it is in FY 1995.  Therefore, any modifications will likely
not be made with new dollars.  The critical first step is for Executive
Unit staff and the Budget Committee to an alyze _ as part of the FY 1996
planning process _ the many areas where funds are currently being used
for volunteer empowerment, draw out those funds with minimal disruption
to ongoing support efforts, and investigate their investment to lay the
groundwor k for the program described above. 
 
Thematically, we believe that AIUSA can take a major step toward
reinventing its activist support structure by: 
 
	beginning to re-design the regional offices;
 
	starting to reconfigure the support budgets for local and youth
groups; 
 
	initiating a pilot organizing project in 1-2 major metropolitan
areas; and
 
	establishing a distinct field operations unit beginning in Phase
I (i.e. with the assistance of a consultant or by hiring a director of
field operations). 
 
There are also a host of specific changes AIUSA can make with little or
no added expense.  Finally, Phase I/FY 1996 will be the time for staff
and volunteers to determine budget needs to support the real needs of a
full-fledged field operation and potenti al sources of funding, as a
springboard for Phase II. 
 
Systemic
 
A. Reconfigure membership support resources (for both student and local
groups) to re-direct ~$170K to new membership support initiatives
(broken out below). (Who:  Budget Committee of the Board; Executive
Unit.)
 
B. Begin establishment of a new field operations unit (ie with the
assistance of a consultant or by hiring a director of field operations). 
(Who:  Deputy Director for Membership Mobilization and Regional/Deputy
Directors.  Resource Requirement [consulti ng fees or other costs]:
~$90,000.)
 
C. Make it a top priority for regional offices and field unit leadership
to identify services that can be consolidated and determine the future
structure and coverage of regional offices.  Final outcome should be a
blueprint for re-designing the offices i n Phase II and providing the
foundation for the prototype region to be established toward the end of
Phase I.  (Who: Regional/Deputy Directors.  Resource Requirement:  None
beyond existing staff.)
 
D. Consult with regional offices and identify key underserved
metropolitan and rural regions _ in terms of local and student group
development _ which are ripe for membership development and support,
using SPiT criteria:  immediacy of local problems; plur alism; resources
already on the ground; potential for fundraising; potential impact
(considering targets like key politicians, corporations, and population
size); and prevalence of universities.  (Who: Regional/Deputy Directors
and Field Operations leader ship.  Resource Requirement:  None beyond
existing staff.)
 
E. Based on research, begin creation of one prototype field-oriented
region by developing a field organizer to serve targeted metro areas in
the same region.  Utilize re-directed funds to smooth transition
(perhaps through in-office support person), minim izing disruption of
existing activist network.  (Who:  Director of Membership Mobilization
and Regional/Deputy Director of targeted region.  Resource Requirement: 
~$45,000 for support and field operation needs in targeted region.)
 
F. Plan for centralization of specific regional functions _ especially
media, administration, accounting and list keeping _ in the national
office, for implementation by Phase II.  (Who:  Director of
Communications and Director of Finance and Administrati on with Field
Operations leadership.  Resource Requirement:  None beyond existing
staff.)
 
G. Create Regional Planning Groups in each existing region to serve as a
formal link between membership and staff in the grassroots planning
process for AIUSA.  (Who:  Regional/Deputy Directors.  Resource
Requirements:  At least $4,000 per region for meet ing costs,
communications.)
 
I. Complete review _ along the recommendations of SPiT _ of networks and
how they should operate and be funded.  (Who:  Network volunteer
leadership and staff and Director of Membership Mobilization.  Resource
Requirement:  None beyond existing staff.)
 
Specific
 
2. Recruitment:  Volunteer Centers (Who: Regional/Deputy Directors and
Resource Development and Delivery.  Resource Requirement:  Minimal
mailing costs.)
 
3. Recruitment:  800# volunteer option (Who:  Development Unit. 
Resource Requirement:  Added complexity = added contract fee?)
 
4. Recruitment:  800# in major metro/state capitol phone books.  (Who: 
Director of Member Mobilization.  Resource Requirement:  Added annual
listing costs of ~$1,000.)
 
5. Recruitment:  Volunteer inquiry turnaround.  (Who:  Regional Office
Administrator and Resource Development and Delivery (by Phase II). 
Resource Requirement:  None beyond existing staff.)
 
10. Recruitment:  Activist reminder.  (Who:  Publications and Membership
Communications.  Resource Requirement:  Minimal formatting changes.)
 
11. Local groups:  Minimum group standards.  (Who:  ACSC and
Regional/Deputy Directors with local group input.  Resource Requirement: 
None beyond existing staff.  Potential net income gain over five year
period.)
 
12. Youth groups:  Allocation of action files.  (Who:  Casework
Coordinator.  Resource Requirement:  Mailing and administrative costs.)
 
13. Youth groups:  Minimum group standards.  (Who:  NCAC and
Regional/Deputy Directors with youth group input.  Resource requirement:
None beyond existing staff.)
 
14. Local and youth groups:  Basic modular systems for youth and local
groups.  (Who:  NCAC and ACSC with Regional/Deputy Directors and input
from group leaders.  Resource Requirement:  $5,000 for meeting, research
and communication costs.) 22. ACs and SACs:  Recruitment efforts to
continue diversification.  (Who:  Deputy Directors and Field Organizers
with the Cultural Diversity Working Group.  Resource Requirements:  None
beyond existing staff/volunteers.)
 
24. Resource Delivery:  Material delivery in two days and return of
AIUSA activist phone calls within 24 hours..  (Who:  Regional offices
and Resource Development and Delivery [by Phase II].  Resource
Requirement:  None beyond existing staff.)
 
28. Communication:  Improve graphic design.  (Who:  Membership
Communications.  Resource Requirement:  Add $10,000 for
consulting/production.)
 
29. Communication:  Improve Monthly Mailing.  (Who:  Membership
Communications.  Resource Requirement:  Current resources plus use of
consulting arrangement under #28.)
 
30. Communication:  Activist pitches in Amnesty Action.  (Who: 
Membership Communications.  Resource Requirement:  None.)
 
33. Communication:  Non-partisan language.  (Who:  Group
leaders/editors, Membership Communications.  Resource Requirement: 
Awareness.)
 
34. Recognition:  Activist profiles.  (Who:  Membership Communications. 
Resource Requirement:  None except some minor photo processing/scanning
charges.)
 
35. Recognition:  Lapel pins.  (Who:  NCAC and ACSC to set up
registration, tracking and pin design.  Resource Requirement:  ~$3,000
for first run.)
 
36. Recognition:  Certificates, decals, patches.  (Who:  NCAC and ACSC
to set up criteria and awards.  Resource Requirement:  ~$1,000 for
initial program implementation.)
 
40. Graduation:  "Graduation" trainings.  (Who:  NCAC, Trainers. 
Resource Requirement:  None beyond existing staff and volunteers.)
 
Phase II:  1996-1998
 
Phase II will be perhaps the most crucial phase, when AIUSA truly puts
into place a full-fledged field operations system and also jacks up
volunteer recruitment and graduation efforts.  To accomplish this will
require not only significant systemic changes but also a major
fundraising effort.  For unless major cuts are made in other departments
of AIUSA, it will take substantial sums of new money to nourish this new
system.  We estimate that AIUSA will require at least $605,500 annually
in new income to ef fect the following changes.  Bear in mind that these
figures are only estimates and are included for discussion and to give a
sense of the major investments needed to make a field operation system
work. 
 
Systemic
 
I. Establish Field Organizers in all regional offices.  Provide adequate
staff support to maintain and improve servicing of youth and local
groups.  (Who:  Field Operations leadership, Director of Membership
Mobilization and Regional/Deputy Directors.  Re source Requirements: 
Estimate of $45,000 per remaining office or $180,000.)
 
J. Establish a new National Field Support Office working with the Field
Operations leadership.  Staffpersons will cover training, membership
communications, resource development and delivery, and meeting
organization (for AGMs and Regional Meetings).  Who :  Director of
Membership Mobilization and Field Operations leadership.  Resource
Requirements:  Rough estimate of $250,000 for new staff, benefits and
costs.)
 
K. Implement plan to shift regional responsibilities for media,
administration, and finance to national offices.  (Who:  Director of
Communications and Director of Finance and Administration with Field
Operations leadership.  Resource Requirement:  Staff and other resources
here should be determined as part of the Phase I planning process.)
 
Specific
 
1. Recruitment:  Media support for volunteer recruitment.  (Who: 
Communications Unit.  Resource Requirement:  Build in as part of public
affairs campaigns.  Estimate of $20,000 if added on top of general
public awareness.)
 
6. Recruitment materials:  Quarterly sheet of volunteer opportunities. 
(Who:  Resource Development and Delivery and Membership Communications. 
Resource Requirement:  Printing and mailing estimate: $4,000.)
 
7. Recruitment materials:  Brochures and inserts.  (Who:  Resource
Development and Delivery and Membership Communications.  Resource
Requirement:  Printing and mailing estimate: $8,000.)
 
8. Recruitment materials:  Recruitment video.  (Who:  Resource
Development and Delivery and Membership Communications.  Resource
Requirement:  Video production: $10,000.)
 
9. Recruitment:  Explore quarterly stream of new members' names.  (Who: 
Development and Membership Services Departments.  Resource Requirement: 
Study will require some staff investigation.)
 
15. Local and youth groups:  Standardized start-up materials.  (Who: 
Resource Development and Delivery.  Resource Requirement:  Printing
estimate:  $10,000.)
 
16. Local and youth groups:  One annual visit. (Who:  ACs, SACs, Field
Organizers _ and monitored by Field Organizers.  Resource Requirement: 
None beyond established staff and volunteers.)
 
17. ACs and SACs:  Standard ratio of groups.  (Who:  Field Organizers
and AC/NCAC.  Resource Requirements:  None beyond established staff and
volunteers.)
 
18. ACs and SACs:  Monthly contact.  (Who:  Field Organizers and
AC/NCAC.  Resource Requirements:  None beyond established staff and
volunteers.)
 
19. ACs and SACs:  Transition plan to merge AC and SAC structures. 
(Who:  Field Operations leadership and ACSC/NCAC.  Resource
Requirements:  $5,000 for meeting costs.)
 
20. ACs and SACs:  National standards for training.  (Who:  National
Training and ACSC/NCAC.  Resource Requirement:  None beyond established
staff. 
 
21. ACs and SACs:  Reimbursement standard.  (Who:  Field Operations
leadership, ACSC/NCAC, and Director of Finance.  Resource Requirements: 
Minimum estimate at $250 per AC/SAC at 250 coordinators to service 2,000
groups = $62,500.)
 
23. Clusters:  Explore the more systematic development of clusters. 
(Who:  Field Operations leadership, Field Organizers, and
Regional/Deputy Directors.  Resource Requirements:  None beyond existing
staff.)
 
26. Materials:  Videos.  (Who:  Resource Development and Delivery. 
Resource Requirement:  Video product at $15,000.)
 
27. Materials:  Training manual for local groups.  (Who:  Resource
Development and Delivery and National Training.  Resource Development
and Delivery:  Printing at $4,000.)
 
37. Graduation:  Volunteer opportunities pitch.  (Who:  Resource
Development and Delivery.  Resource Requirement:  Printing at $5,000.)
 
38. Graduation:  End-of-the-year college mailing.  (Who:  Resource
Development and Delivery.  Resource Requirement:  Printing at $10,000.)
 
39. Graduation:  End-of-the-year high school mailing.  (Who:  Resource
Development and Delivery.  Resource Requirement:  Printing at $10,000.)
 
 
Phase III:  1998-2000
 
Phase III is the time when AIUSA should evaluate the system as it has
evolved, determine its effectiveness and whether it is achieving more
substantial human rights results.  If resources are available and the
program is performing well, it will also prov ide a time to flesh out
the new membership development system and spread it into currently
underserved parts of the U.S.  A very rough estimate of the added costs
for implementing the changes described below would be $685,000 in new
money each year. 
 
Systemic
 
L. Begin establishing new regional offices in underserved areas (e.g.
the Northwest and South-central U.S.).  (Who:  Directors of Membership
Mobilization and Field Operations leadership.  Resource Requirements: 
Conservative estimate of $600,000 annually.)
 
M. Implement NCAC/ACSC merger program to consolidate AIUSA's membership
development program.  (Who:  NCAC, ACSC and Field Operations leadership. 
Resource Requirements:  None beyond established staff and volunteers.)
 
Specific
 
31. Communication:  E-mail fund.  (Who:  Resource Delivery and
Development.  Resource Requirement:  $25,000.)
 
32. Communication:  Area meetings.  (Who:  Field Organizers and
Conference Coordinator.  Resource Requirement:  $60,000 for meeting
costs.) What Does Change Look Like? 
 
The year 2000 is still a long way away.  But if AIUSA moves in the basic
directions recommended by MAT, we can begin to visualize these promising
results: 
 
	More volunteer activists recruited, placed and retained;

	Activists who are better prepared and coordinated;

	Activists and groups connected _ not isolated _ by staff,
volunteer leaders, attractive and informative materials, and advanced
telecommunications;

	Groups and activists planning ahead, guided by clear national
priorities _ and their own involvement in the planning process;

	Local and youth groups receiving timely, substantial and regular
support;

	Activists who more closely reflect the changing demographic and
cultural mix of the United States;

	Groups and activists spread across all parts of the U.S., rural
and urban, coastal and inland;

	Activists who stick with Amnesty International because it gives
them enjoyment, satisfaction, and opportunities for personal growth; and

	most important of all, a much more powerful activist base to
effectively combat human rights violations at home and around the world. 
 
If those kind of results appeal to you, then come join the Membership
Action Team in shaping the final format and ideas of this plan, putting
its recommendations into place, and beginning a five year journey toward
a revitalized activist base for AIUSA.  We welcome your input and
participation! 
 
** End of text from cdp:aiusa.policy **


====    ====    ====    ====    ====    ====    ====

Response   1  of   1

** Written  2:19 PM  Mar  5, 1995 by samsontu in cdp:aiusa.policy **
Dear Jim,

Thanks for mailing the MAT proposal to me. It arrived just before I left
for a week-long conference. I was not able to make copies and share it
with other Group 19 members as I promised. However, the long plane ride
back from Canada gave me the luxury of responding in detail to the MAT
proposal. The other side of the coin is that I have no chance to discuss
the ideas outlined below with anyone else. Thus, please be forgiving if
they sound outrageous or impractical.  These are the rant and raving of
a rela tive novice in AIUSA. (I am not even eligible for a 5-year lapel
pin.)

I am very impressed with the proposal.  It calls for the regional
offices to return to the field organizing model that was supposed
effective in cultivating grassroots activism.  It has many excellent
suggestions on how to make activists more effective. T he proposal,
however, scarcely touches on the fact that the technological basis for
communication in the late 90s is vastly different from that available in
the 70s and early 80s.  The availability of emails and conferences has
created avenues of informat ion flow that didn't exist before. (For
example, I don't think I'd heard about the MAT report at all without my
electronic connections.) I hope the MAT proposal can systematically
consider how the capabilities of computer communication (that is
becoming increasingly prevalent) can the capability of computer help
AIUSA achieving many of the goals enumerated in the MAT proposal. 

Imagine that AIUSA has a well-organized and password-protected
ftp/gopher/WWW archive of internal training materials, campaign
materials, publication materials that volunteers from all over the
country (or around the world) can contribute to and download from.
Imagine that we have mailing list circles that tie together those groups
and individuals that are working on common tasks or are close together
geographically.  With such infrastructure in place, let's look at some
of the problems that MAT wishes to
 address in the re-organization of AIUSA.

1. AIUSA overburdens groups with too many actions and too much paper?
Well, just tell the groups what are available, and interested groups can
download what they want from the archive. 

2. Group lacks tight coordination and communication? The email
distribution lists should help coordination and communication. 

3. Groups are isolated through lack of contact? The email distribution
list can help groups to break the isolation.  MAT proposal calls for the
ACs to contact the groups at least monthly. Electronic mail is a great
tool for maintaining contact among geogr aphically dispersed groups. 

4. AIUSA recruits new members sporadically?  In addition to the
recruitment ideas enumerated in the MAT proposal, we should recruit
aggressively in the cyberspace.  Not only will this medium help us reach
people whom we may miss with other techniques, the members recruited
through this medium will help groups upgrade their technological
capability.  Group 19 has fair success in making its presence known to
those in the S.F. Bay area interested in Amnesty.  Most of the people on
our electronic newsletter m ailing list are recruited through the
Internet. 

5. AIUSA provides insufficient and inconsistent materials and training? 
All groups that have Internet access can download everything from the
ftp/gopher/WWW archive. 

6. AIUSA invests unequally in different regions and sectors?  The
availability of the on-line archive material should help to equalize the
difference. 

I am not claiming that we can solve Amnesty problems by blind
application of technology.  Many groups are not ready to take advantage
of the computer communication.  If we are not careful, it is possible
that technology can exacerbate some of the inequali ties that already
exist among groups.  Nevertheless, we should recognize digitization of
information as the direction we want to go. We probably will be going in
that direction no matter what.  If we plan for the changes carefully, I
believe that there is a match between the capabilities of new technology
and the needs of Amnesty as outlined in the MAT proposal. At the time
when the organization examines and reinvents its work process, it should
plan for the use of technology to streamline its flow of inf ormation. 
Not to do so is to miss a golden opportunity. 

I don't know how much time and money you spent mailing out the MAT
proposal. If we had an on-line archive where you could deposit the
proposal (using one or several of the common formats), I could have
retrieved it myself.  I don't know how much staff tim e is spent sending
out documents. If these documents could be searched and retrieved by
individuals or groups that need them, how much staff time will be saved? 
In various parts of the MAT proposal, you call for creating bright
graphical materials.  Crea ting such material from scratch is expensive
and time consuming.  Yet Shawn Giese has put together a large collection of
activist graphical images that we cannot distribute easily. 

I suggest:

Systemic changes:

AIUSA considers how to evolve into an organization where the creation,
transmission, and storage of its information resources are consistent
with the requirements of electronic communication. 

AIUSA develops models of using information technology its internal and
external communication and coordination. 

Specific changes:

5.1 Recruitment: Post announcements of Amnesty group activities on
Internet on regular basis

8.1 Recruitment: Develop attractive public recruitment WWW pages on
Internet

16.1 Local and student groups: Make survey of groups' access to Internet
resources and tools (email, ftp, gopher, WWW)

20. ACs and SACs: Make computer literacy part of AC and SAC training

27.1. Resource Delivery: Investigate the feasibility of
password-protected internal ftp/gopher/WWW Amnesty resource archive

28. Communication: ......Make MM and Amnesty available on line in one or
several of the common formats (e.g., DOS or Mac Word, WordPerfect)

33.1 Communication: Develop policy and procedure for establishing
internal AIUSA mailing lists

33.2 Examine the work practices within the organization to see how
information flow may be digitized. 

33.3 Support pilot projects (such the ones Rena Margulis suggested) that
use electronic communication to coordinate nation-wide media and
legislative actions. 

A couple of thoughts on non-computer issues: (1) perhaps it is taken for
granted, but I strongly urge that the due-paying members of AIUSA be
informed of the reorganization plan and the implementation progress; (2)
nothing in the proposal leads me to beli eve that at the end of the
reorganization, AIUSA will be more diverse culturally. 

This is all I have to say.

Sincerely,
Samson Tu
Group 19, Palo Alto, California
** End of text from cdp:aiusa.policy **
