MiniATHENA                    2013/10/01

Installation 

		The installation instruction is designed for Windows 
		1. Unzip MiniATHENA.zip to your local file system
		2. Edit the batch\miniHTN.bat and batch\miniHF.bat files to give correct file system path of
		   your installation and to specify the location of JDK or JRE

Running ATHENA
       1. Double click (or run from a command line) MiniATHENA\batch\miniHTN.bat or MiniATHENA\batch\miniHF.bat
          If the system complains that certain drive is not available, 
          just click "Continue".
       2. The CDS output should be in the out/ directory


Tips
       1. Monitor the (black) Java console window for any exception being
          thrown. You may have to restart the demo occasionally.
       2. The schemas for input and output are in the schema/ directory. The current 
		  XML CDS output is incomplete (missing the "action" branch of the CDS output


Disclaimer

The clinical information from this system is advisory only and is
intended to supplement the knowledge of health care professionals
regarding the management of hypertension. It is not intended to
replace sound clinical judgement or individualized patient care in
delivery of healthcare services.

Although the ATHENA-HTN information is derived from research
literature and is subject to review, we cannot guarantee its
comprehensiveness or currency. Please note that medical information is
dynamic due to ongoing research and clinical experience and is subject
to interpretation. There is also the possibility of errors in the
programming.

The user of this software assumes sole responsibility for any
decisions made or actions taken based the information contained in
this software, including but not limited to therapeutic suggestions.

ATHENA-HTN, the Department of Veterans Affairs and Stanford University
shall have no liability to any person, or entity with regard to
claims, loss, or damage caused, or alleged to be caused, directly or
indirectly by the use of this software or the information contained
within.

ATHENA-HTN is the property of Stanford’s Office Technology Licensing
(OTL) and Department of Veterans Affairs.

By running ATHENA-HTN, you agree to use ATHENA-HTN only as a reference
resource for research. You agree to abstain from using ATHENA-HTN to
generate knowledge for treatment.
