ATHENA-HTN Demo Version                   2007/08/01

Installation 

       1. Make sure that your C: drive has at least 50 megabytes of free space

       2. Unzip ATHENADEMO.zip to the C: drive. You should 
          have a "C:\ATHENADEMO" directory.

Running ATHENA
       1. Double click (or run from a command line) ATHENADEMO\bin\athena.bat 
          If the system complains that certain drive is not available, 
          just click "Continue".
       2. Make sure that you are in the 'HTN Advisory' tab. Select a patient 
          case on the 'Patient List' and click the 'Compute Advisory' button.
       3. See the 'Training Manual ATHENA-HTN.doc' for more details


Difference between the Demo version and production version
       1. Instead of a pop-up window showing the ATHENA advisory, the window 
          is embeded in Protege graphical user interface as a tab. 
       2. No BP-vs-medication history graph is shown
       3. Computed co-morbidities are included in the 'Related Comorbidities' 
          data summery 
       4. A user can modifiy the knowledge base in Protege and recompute 
          advisories to see the effect of the modifications.
Tips
       1. Monitor the (black) Java console window for any exception being
          thrown. You may have to restart the demo occasionally.
       2. You can add or change the data values in the 'Enter a New BP' 
          part of the Advisory tab of the 'Hypertension Guideline' or 
          the 'Summary Sheet' tab of the Patient' Information pane and 
          get an updated advisory.

Additional ATHENA-HTN documentation is available in the ATHENADEMO/doc directory. 

Disclaimer

The clinical information from this system is advisory only and is
intended to supplement the knowledge of health care professionals
regarding the management of hypertension. It is not intended to
replace sound clinical judgment or individualized patient care in
delivery of healthcare services.

Although the ATHENA-HTN information is derived from research
literature and is subject to review, we cannot guarantee its
comprehensiveness or currency. Please note that medical information is
dynamic due to ongoing research and clinical experience and is subject
to interpretation. There is also the possibility of errors in the
programming.

The user of this software assumes sole responsibility for any
decisions made or actions taken based the information contained in
this software, including but not limited to therapeutic suggestions.

ATHENA-HTN, the Department of Veterans Affairs and Stanford University
shall have no liability to any person, or entity with regard to
claims, loss, or damage caused, or alleged to be caused, directly or
indirectly by the use of this software or the information contained
within.

ATHENA-HTN is the property of Stanford’s Office Technology Licensing
(OTL) and Department of Veterans Affairs.

By running ATHENA-HTN, you agree to use ATHENA-HTN only as a reference
resource for research. You agree to abstain from using ATHENA-HTN to
generate knowledge for treatment.
